---
title: "7zip on Linux"
date: 2008-05-18
modified: 2011-08-27
tags:
  - linux
  - shell
categories:
  - archiving
author_profile: true
draft: false
comments: false
---

It can happen during your life that you bump into a `.7z` file. The `.7z` is an archive produced by the 7-Zip archiver program. It's distinctive feature is to use the LZMA compression algorithm that guarantee a compression ratio 30-50% better than the common ZIP algorithm. Nevertheless many archiver don't read the 7z format, maybe due to its scarce diffusion, and tar is not an exception.

To create and read a 7z archive we need a new package. In Debian the package name is p7zip. If you install the p7zip-full package you gain a module that integrate 7-Zip inside File Roller and other famous GUI. There is also p7zip-rar that provide a module for 7-Zip to unpack RAR files. In other distributions the name may change.

To extract a 7-Zip archive in the current directory the command is

```bash
$ p7zip -x /percorso/nome_file.7z
```

while with

```bash
$ p7zip -l /percorso/nome_file.7z
```

you can list the package content.\\
Is in general a bad idea to use 7-Zip on Unix to do backups. This is because the 7z format doesn't keep owner and group of the file so original permission go away. The golden tool to do backups is always `tar`. Fortunately is possible to create a RAR archive first and then compress it with the 7z algorithm. In this way all attributes of original files are kept.

```bash
$ tar -cvf file.tar folder/* && 7zip -a file.tar.7z file.tar
```

This is a one-liner to create the rar archive and compress it. The `file.tar` archive remain and must be deleted by hand.
