---
title: "Install fonts on Linux"
date: 2008-04-15
modified: 2012-06-01
tags:
  - linux
  - system
categories:
  - system
author_profile: true
draft: false
comments: false
---

On the internet there are zillions of different fonts, of any kind. But how to make this fonts available to our user or maybe to the whole system?

First we need the fonts! They are almost always packaged in some archive with different extensions. Unpack them where you prefer.

Where to put our fonts? There are two choice. If you are the system administrator and you want to make the fonts available for all the users, use a system folder like `/usr/share/fonts` or `/usr/local/share/fonts` (theoretically the `/usr/local/share/fonts` directory is the correct one). If you are a user without access to the system or you want the font only for you there is the `/home/user/.fonts` in your home. If the folder is missing, create it. Putting the fonts here or there make no difference for the continuation.

## Move your fonts in the preferred folder

```bash
$ mv *.ttf ~/.fonts                      # < with user permissions
# mv *.ttf /usr/local/share/fonts        # < with root permissions
```

if you want you can change permissions

```bash
$ chmod 644 ~/.fonts/*.ttf
```

Now update the fonts database with

```bash
$ cd ~/.fonts
$ mkfontscale && mkfontdir
$ fc-cache
```

* `mkfontscale`: creates a list of scalable fonts for X. Has many options but we don't care here.
* `mkfontdir`: creates a index of the fonts in the directory.
* `fc-cache`: builds the fonts cache.

## Adding new directories to the fonts path

If you have used one of the standard directories I listed at the top you're done. But if you have created a new directory to contain the fonts, you must add the directory to the fonts path. In many distributions (like Red Hat) the command `chkfontpath` will do it

```bash
# chkfontpath --add /folder/you/have/created
```

In distributions where this is not available (Debian and *buntu) you need to modify the `fontconfig` package options. Go to the `fontconfig` configuration file

```bash
# cd /etc/fonts
# less fonts.config
```

This is a xml-based configuration file. You should find after some line this text

```xml
<!-- Font directory list -->

        <dir>/usr/share/fonts</dir>
        <dir>/usr/X11R6/lib/X11/fonts</dir> <dir>/usr/local/share/fonts</dir>
        <dir>~/.fonts</dir>
```

Adding a new directory is a matter of add a line with the syntax `<dir>folder</dir>`. However this is not recommended (Note this advice at the top of the file)

```xml
<!--
        DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE.
        IT WILL BE REPLACED WHEN FONTCONFIG IS UPDATED.
        LOCAL CHANGES BELONG IN 'local.conf'.
```

So the best thing to do is create a new file called `local.conf` in the same directory of `fonts.conf` and put inside the following lines

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE fontconfig SYSTEM "fonts.dtd">
<fontconfig>
        <!-- Local system customization file -->
        <dir>/folder/you/have/created</dir>
</fontconfig>
```

## Reload the xfs server

If you have a `xfs` server running on your machine, restart it to read the new fonts

```bash
# /etc/init.d/xfs restart
```

## Useful link

[The Debian fonts page](http://wiki.debian.org/Fonts)\\
[The Arch Linux fonts page](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Font_Configuration)\\
[The fontconfig manual at Freedesktop.org](http://www.freedesktop.org/software/fontconfig/fontconfig-user.html)
