---
title: "OTP password in SSH"
date: 2008-12-21
modified: 2011-08-28
tags:
  - ssh
  - otp
  - security
categories:
  - ssh
author_profile: true
draft: false
comments: false
---

Le One Time Password (OTP) are throwaway passwords that you can use only one time. They were very useful years ago when SSH was not there yet and people login to remote server using unprotected protocols like `rcp`, `rsh`, `rlogin`, ecc. You were continually exposed to Man-In-The-Middle attacks. The coming of SSH made OTP password less used. But if you have to login to a remote server from a public pc where someone can have installed a keylogger, OTP are still very useful. The password caught by the keylogger is useless because you have just used it.

## Configuring OTP

The common implementation of OTP on Linux is OPIE (One Password In Everything). On Debian (and *buntu) the packages to install are

```bash
# apt-get install opie-server opie-client libpam-opie
```

Now we have to generate an account for our user on the box

```bash
nero@note:~$ opiepasswd -c
Adding nero:
Only use this method from the console; NEVER from remote. If you are using
telnet, xterm, or a dial-in, type ^C now or exit with no password.
Then run opiepasswd without the -c parameter.
Using MD5 to compute responses.
Enter new secret pass phrase: 
Again new secret pass phrase: 

ID nero OTP key is 499 he6074
BAN RIB THEM BOIL SOY BORG
```

The generation program ask for a secret phrase we have to enter. The phrase is used to generate a seed (in the above case is he6074) and a set of 500 password. The last line tell us the first password of the set that we must use the next time we want to login. Everytime we successfully login the system will give us another password of the set.

You can generate the password set also from remote if you don't have physical access to the server. In this case the procedure to follow is the same but you have to bet set up before generating passwords (see below Setting up SSH) and the command to submit is

```bash
$ opiepasswd -cf
```

That make the OPT server think you are on a secure connection thanks to the `-f` option.

## Setting up SSH

To use OTP with ssh we need to modify the SSH daemon configuration file. On Debian the file is `/etc/pam.d/sshd` (on different distribution it may change). Add the following line in the file

```bash
auth       required     pam_opie.so
```

so that a grep on the file give you something similar to

```bash
# cat /etc/pam.d/sshd | grep "auth       required"
auth       required     pam_env.so # [1]
auth       required     pam_env.so envfile=/etc/default/locale
auth       required     pam_opie.so
```

In this way the OTP password becomes "required" to login with SSH. Now the system must ask us for the OTP password giving us the next one to use. We must modify the SSH server configuration file `/etc/ssh/ssh_config` (on Debian) adding the following line

```bash
ChallengeResponseAuthentication yes
```

We need to reload SSH configurations using

```bash
# /etc/init.d/ssh reload
```

Now if you try to access to the box from remote what happen is

```bash
nero@note:~$ ssh home.server
otp-md5 498 he6074 ext, Response:
```

The system tell us the password to give is the number 498.

## Print the passwords

Since the whole set of passwords is generated at the same time, the system know all the passwords. We can print a subset of those passwords to keep them somewhere. Clearly is better to print the list on a secure terminal like a SSH one or locally on the server if we have physical eccess to it to avoid someone can steal them. To print a subset of 10 passwords

```bash
nero@note:~$ opiekey -n 10 498 he6074
Using the MD5 algorithm to compute response.
Reminder: Don't use opiekey from telnet or dial-in sessions.
Enter secret pass phrase: 
489: MONA CROW FAY ALL RIG HONK
490: REEK EGO SANE ON GATE POT
491: NEED SLEW CRAY AIRY VERB CUBE
492: SENT JAB SELF VIEW MATE CALF
493: FAD WINK SHY DREW HOC BANE
494: IOTA DISC WAR DOCK SALT BALM
495: SOP COAL TASK SIS HONK MARE
496: BRAN SLOW SNAG WACK CLUE LAMB
497: WED BID RED ACHE CROW FLED
498: ELK RAKE TRY BOUT NODE HUT
```

Now you can print them on paper. _DO NOT LOOSE THE PAPER!_
