---
title: "OTP password"
date: 2016-12-28
tags:
  - otp
  - security
categories:
  - ssh
author_profile: true
draft: false
comments: false
---

One Time Passwords (OTP) are throwaway passwords that you can use one time only. They were very useful years ago when SSH was not there yet and people login to remote server using unprotected protocols like `rcp`, `rsh`, `rlogin`, ecc. You were continually exposed to Man In The Middle attacks. SSH made OTP password less used. Nowadays OTP can be very useful if you have to login to a remote server from a public computer where keylogger or memory scraper are a possibility or you are working on a shared workstation. In practice in any scenario where you are connecting to a trusted destination from an untrusted source.\
The OTP is usable a single time only and therefore it will be useless to an attacker that managed to eavesdrop it. The passwords are generated in advance and stored hashed on the remote server. The user carries a copy (printed on paper for example) of the list of passwords. At login the user is prompted for one password from the list that is immediately disabled after use.

This article was originally written for OPIE one-time passwords. However, on Debian and derivatives, this application has been removed due to license problems and no upstream update. Instead, the OTPW package is used. In the following the OTPW package is set up, but the old article on OPIE is left at the bottom in case might be useful for someone.

## Installation

On Debian and derivatives install the following packages

```bash
apt-get install libpam-otpw otpw-bin
```

On Arch

```bash
yaourt -S otpw 
```

On Red Hat/Fedora there are no packages. Therefore the source code has to be compiled

```bash
git clone https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/git/otpw
cd optw
vi Makefile
PAMLIB=/usr/lib64/security
make; make install
```

## PAM

It is convenient to configure PAM to use OTPW for authentications in the system. By creating an ad-hoc file OTPW can be added to any situation where an authentication is required. Create a new file called

```bash
touch /etc/pam.d/otpw
```

and insert

```bash
auth           required      pam_otpw.so
session        optional      pam_otpw.so
```

Then open the PAM file relative to SSH, usually `/etc/pam.d/sshd`.\
Search for the line

```bash
@include common-auth
```

and comment it out adding the OTPW PAM file instead. In Debian/Ubuntu

```bash
# Enable OTPW
@include otpw
# Standard Un*x
#@include common-auth
```

In Arch

```bash
# Enable OTPW
@include otpw
# Standard Un*x
#auth      include   system-remote-login
```

In Red Hat/Fedora

```bash
# Enable OTPW
@include otpw
# Standard Un*x
#auth       substack     password-auth
```

It is not strictly required to comment out the standard authentication method. If it is not commented it will be still available for log in. In this case note that the order in which the authentication methods appear will be respected during the authentication procedure.

## SSHD

Now we must be sure that SSH is using PAM for authentication. Open the SSH daemon configuration file

```bash
vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config
```

and search/add the following lines

```bash
UsePrivilegeSeparation yes
UsePAM yes
ChallengeResponseAuthentication yes
PasswordAuthentication no
```

If you want to enable the public key authentication in addition to the OTPW make sure you have the following line

```bash
PubkeyAuthentication yes
```

If you don't want to use the public key set the line to

```bash
PubkeyAuthentication no
```

Reload the SSH daemon

* Old style

   ```bash
   /etc/init.d/ssh reload
   ```

* Debian service

   ```bash
   service ssh reload
   ```

* SystemD

   ```bash
   systemctl restart sshd
   ```

## Generating OTPW

To generate a new set of OTPW passwords use the command

```bash
otpw-gen > my_otpw.txt
```

A new seed is generated and a prefix to be added to each password is requested. When you log in, a 3-digit password number will be displayed. It identifies the one-time password on your list that you have to append to the prefix password. If another login to your account is in progress at the same time, several password numbers may be shown and all corresponding passwords have to be appended after the prefix password. Best generate a new password list when you have used up half of the old one.

```bash
-
Enter new prefix password:
Reenter prefix password:
-
```

Than the hashed version of the passwords is locally stored in `.otpw`

```bash
-
Creating '~/.otpw'.
Generating new one-time passwords ...
```

If this is not the first generation of passwords an `.otpw` is already present. Therefore it is first asked whether the old password file should be deleted

```bash
Overwrite existing password list '~/.otpw' (Y/n)?
```

Every user with a .otpw file in the home directory will be prompted for OTPW to log in on SSH. If an user wants to be disabled just remove this file from the home.

## Using OTPW

Given the list of password, log in to SSH. You will be prompted with the password challenge

```bash
ssh localhost
Password 032:
```

To to log in type in your prefix password by memory (you didn't write it on the piece of paper, right?) and the 32-th password. If you fail entering the password you will be prompted again up to the maximum number of trials, usually 3. If the standard authentication method has not be commented out, you'll be prompted with the standard authentication method after each OTPW attempt. After a OTPW has been used for a login, is permanently disabled. Therefore, even if an attacker was able to eavesdrop it, it will be unusable for a second log in.
