---
title: "Notes on *The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Theory and Evidence*"
date: 2024-04-10
tags:
  - capm
  - equity-risk-premium
  - investing
  - literature review
categories:
  - finance
author_profile: true
draft: false
comments: false
math: true
slug: notes-capital-asset-pricing-model-theory-evidence
---

The paper introduces the CAPM model in the Sharpe-Lintner-Black version from Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) and Black (1972).

## Logic

In the Markowitz model an investor chooses at time \(t-1\) a mean-variance-efficient portfolio, aka one that 1) minimizes variance given returns, 2) maximize returns given variance. To ensure a mean-variant-efficient portfolio the following assumptions must be verified:

* *Complete agreement*: investors agree on the joint distribution of asset returns from \(t-1\) to \(t\)
* *Borrowing/lending at the risk-free rate*: the risk-free rate is equal for all investors and constant (does not depend on amounts borrowed/lent)

By borrowing/lending a \(w\) proportion of funds at the risk-free rate and investing in a generic portfolio \(p\), the returns and variance for the investor are:

$$R_p = wR_f + (1-w)R_p$$

$$E[R_p] = wR_f + (1-w)E[R_p]$$

$$\sigma(R_p) = (1-w)\sigma(R_g)$$

In absence of borrowing/lending, the mean-variance-efficient portfolios are the ones on the "upper branch" of the efficient frontier. In presence of borrowing/lending however, all of them are dominated by the line connecting the risk-free asset to the tangent portfolio \(T\) obtained by combining the tangent portfolio with the risk-free asset.

If assumption 1 is verified, all investors agree on the returns distribution, and therefore on the expected return and variance, of each asset. All investors will therefore calculate the same efficient frontier and individuate the same tangent portfolio \(T\).\
As a logical consequence, to maximize their risk/return ratio, all investors will invest in a combination of risk-free asset and the same tangent portfolio.

Since all investors hold the same portfolio, this must be the market portfolio \(M\) where each asset is weighted by its value respect to the total value of the market. Also, since it is a mean-variance-efficient portfolio, the following relation must hold between the asset \(i\) and the market

$$E[R_i] = E[R_z] + \beta_{iM}\left(E[R_M] - E[R_z]\right)$$

\(\beta_{iM}\) can be interpreted as a measure of:

* the sensitivity of the asset's return to variations in the market return
* the covariance risk of asset \(i\) relative to the covariance risk of all assets

The \(\beta\) is calculated as

$$\beta_{iM} = \frac{\mathrm{Cov}\left(R_i, R_M\right)}{\mathrm{Var}(R_M)}$$

The term \(E[R_z]\) is the expected return of an asset such that \(\beta_{zM} = 0\). For such condition to hold true, the asset must have \(\rho\left(R_z, R_M\right) = 0\) meaning that the asset is riskless in the market portfolio. Hence, must be the risk-free asset \(R_f\).

The final formulation reads

$$E[R_i] = R_f + \beta_{iM}\left(E[R_M] - R_f\right)$$

### Fisher Black CAPM

In the above formulation there are no limits to borrowing/lending, which is unrealistic. Black removes the risk-free asset and introduces instead the (equally unrealistic) assumption that investors can short sell assets in an unrestricted way. Portfolios obtained combining long and short positions can be efficient. The average of all the efficient long-short portfolios choosen by investors is the market portfolio and is efficient.

Since the market portfolio in absence of a risk-free asset but in presence of short selling, is efficient, the equation above must still hold. However, \(E[R_z]\) cannot be \(R_f\) that does not exists but only \(E[R_z] < E[R_M]\) must hold.

Note that if both risk-free asset and short selling are not available, investors can still choose Markowitz efficient portfolios, but their combinations are NOT efficient.

## Tests

Testing the model requires testing the following relations:

* \(E[R_i] \propto \beta_{iM}\).
* \(\rho_{fM} = 0\).
* \(E[R_M] > R_f \Longrightarrow E[R_p] = E[R_M] - R_f > 0\) with \(E[R_p]\) expected risk premium.

### Tests approaches

#### Cross-section regression

* *Approach*: cross-section regression of average asset returns on estimates of asset betas
* *Problems*:
  * estimates of \(\beta\) are imprecise
  * residuals are positevely correlated (e.g. same source of variation across industry or country) leading to a downward bias in the standard errors

Proposals to correct for the correlation of residuals:

* Blume (1970), Friend and Blume (1970) and Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972)
  * *Approach*: regress portfolios instead of individual assets as CAPM is applicable to combinations of assets. Note that this solution reduces statistical power since the range of \(\beta\) is reduced by averaging. To mitigate, sort assets by estimated \(\beta\) and place assets in portfolios by \(\beta\) so that the first portofolio contains the highest \(\beta\) assets and the last the lowest \(\beta\) assets.
* Fama and MacBeth (1973)
  * *Approach*: perform the regression month-by-month (on monthly data) than take an average of the resulting series.\
    The standard errors in the regression are determined by the month-to-month variation in the regression coefficients.

#### Time-series regression

* *Approach*: time-series regression of asset returns following the formula

$$R_{it} - R_{ft} = \alpha_i + \beta_{iM}\left(R_{Mt} - R_{ft}\right) + \varepsilon_{it}$$

* *Problems*:
  * estimates of \(\beta\) are imprecise
  * residuals are positevely correlated (e.g. same source of variation across industry or country) leading to a downward bias in the standard errors

### Results

#### \(R_p\) and \(R_f\)

If the CAPM holds, the regression intercept is \(R_f\) and the Jensen' alpha for each asset \(i\) is \(\alpha_i = 0\).

Tests evidence reject the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM. The regressions find that the intercept is too large compared to \(R_f\) while the risk premium is less sensitive to the market then the theory prediction. As a consequence there is a positive excess premium for low betas and a negative excess premium for high betas, leading to a relation that is "flatter" than predicted by the theory.

#### Explanatory power of \(\beta\)

If the market portfolio is mean-variance-efficient, any difference in expected return across security is fully explained by differences in the \(\beta\). In the cross-sectional approach additional factors addedd to the model do not have any explanatory power. In the time-series approach the intercept of the model should be zero, regardless of the combination of assets used to create the portfolio.\
All these tests do not test CAPM directly but rather test whether a specific market proxy is efficient and therefore on the minimum variance frontier. To properly test the CAPM all assets would be required.

While early results reject the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM as seen in the previous section, they support the Black CAPM in that the risk premium for \(\beta\) is found to be positive. Late '70 results challenge the Black CAPM as well as numerous works document effects that are not explained by \(\beta\) such as a \(E/P\) effect, a size effect, a debt/equity ratio effect, a book-to-market equity effect.

*If \(\beta\) is not sufficient to explain expected returns, the portfolio is not efficient and the CAPM is flawed.*

### Fama and French

A generalization of CAPM is introduced by Merton (1973) called Intertemporal CAPM, where investors are concerned with the covariances of the portfolio returns with state variables such as labor income and future consumption opportunities.

Fama and French (1993, 1996) propose the 3-factors model

$$E[R_{it}] - R_{ft} = \beta_{iM}(E[R_{Mt}] - R_f) + \beta_{is}E[SMB_t] + \beta_{ih}E[HML_t]$$

with:

* \(SMB\) (small minus big): difference in returns between a diversified portfolio of large stock and one of small stocks
* \(HML\) (high minus low): difference in returns between a diversified portfolio of high \(B/M\) stock and one of low \(B/M\) stocks

If the model holds than the time series regression

$$R_{it} - R_{ft} = \alpha_i + \beta_{iM}(R_{Mt} - R_f) + \beta_{is}SMB_t + \beta_{ih}HML_t + \varepsilon_{it}$$

should results in \(\alpha_i = 0\:\:\forall i\).

The additional factors are not found from theoretical considerations but built to capture the patterns uncovered by previous empirical work.

### Choice of market proxy

A good market proxy must lie on the efficient frontier. However, no such proxy has been found as so far all tested proxies have lead to a CAPM model rejection. Practical real-life applications of CAPM tend to fail probably because faulty proxies are used.

## Link

[Paper PDF](https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/bespeneckbo/default/AFA611-Eckbo%20web%20site/AFA611-S6B-FamaFrench-CAPM-JEP04.pdf)
